
Mon, 5 May 2014 14:59:49 

# The Power of Doubt-Based Action

*I was going to write this blog-post last night - but then this morning
[Bruce Durling]( https://twitter.com/otfrom) pointed me in the direction of
this article on [massive vanity projects](http://t.co/y1MHna3lu1) and
reminded me of the awesome view of the world outlined by [Albert O
Hirschman](http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/books/2013/06/24/130624crbo_books_gladwell?currentPage=all).
It's from re-reading this article by Malcolm Gladwell that I get the idea
of "Doubt-based action."*



OK, let's be brutal and make some assumptions about this project that we're
working on.



**ASSUMPTION 1**

This project will take at least 2 to 3 times as long as expected and also
cost at least 2 to 3 times as much.



**ASSUMPTION 2**

The people who are the customers of this project don't know what they want.



**ASSUMPTION 3**

The calculations of return on investment for this project are suspect and
wouldn't bear scrutiny.



**ASSUMPTION 4**

The people tasked with capturing the requirements of the customers for this
project aren't capable of articulating what the customer wants.



**ASSUMPTION 5**

The people tasked with implementing the technical solution for the project
aren't capable of implement the technical solution (right now this
especially seems to apply to environments).



**ASSUMPTION 6**

The project will fail for a bunch of reasons which are as yet unknown.



**ASSUMPTION 7**

The proposed end-users of this project won't understand it, and won't use
it, or will understand it, and will hate it.



Think I'm being negative?  Think I'm defeatist?  OK then, prove me wrong!
Let's think about this, how would you go about proving me wrong?  Well one
way that you might go about trying to prove me wrong is by trying to
develop a very small part of the overall system that you're supposed to
deliver.  Get the customer to articulate that bit of the system, get the
analysts to capture what the customers want, get the developers to
implement what the analysts capture, get the DevOps people(if these people
actually exist) to actually deploy this to a live platform where it can be
looked at by real users?  Try to do this with less than a fifth of the
overall requirements, ideally less than a tenth.  Then look back at these
assumptions?  To what degree are they true?



How long did it take to do that "tenth of the whole thing?" Really? Nearly
half of the time and money you'd budgeted for the whole project?  Why was
that? Really because there was a lot problems and misunderstandings over
the requirements? Because you had trouble procuring the environments and
getting them up and running on time?  And what was that?  A major
legislation change and a boardroom reshuffle?  And did the users like it?  No?
Really?



In a way, the degree to which people are prepared to actually test these
assumptions, by focusing their activities on minimum viable products that
can be delivered and actually put in front of users is the degree to which
the people you are working for are actually interested in producing
something of value to their users, and themselves.  Conversely, the degree
they avoid testing these assumptions is the degree to which this is just a
vanity project. \*



\* *But as I'm writing this, I'm thinking - what is the actual harm of
massive overrunning infrastructure projects anyway?  Who do they hurt? Do
they really hurt anything or anyone other than our sense of commitment and
consistency?  Built into the idea that massively overspending
infrastructure projects are a bad thing is our old friend scarcity.  But if
we need something to create demand - aren't massive infrastructure projects
a better idea than illegal land wars?  Even a super expensive fighter that
goes massively over-budget, isn't that a *good* thing as long as by the
time it gets into production it's too overloaded with unnecessary missile
systems to actually be a threat?  Isn't this coming around to Albert
Hirschman. Maybe these massive IT projects that will never deliver are
exactly the projects that you want to be working on?  Is it alright to
think like this?  Or does that way madness lie?*
