
Sat, 7 Jun 2014 11:42:59 

# Verbal Self Defence

So, this is a commonplace right?  So I don't have to write coherent blog
posts, I can just write whatever comes into my head.  OK, there are four
books that I've read about verbal self-defence.



>[Suzette Elgin Haden - "The Gentle Art of Verbal Self-Defence"](http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/0880290307?ie=UTF8&camp=3194&creative=21330&creativeASIN=0880290307&linkCode=shr&tag=theginmum-21&qid=1402165813&sr=8-1&keywords=suzette+elgin+haden)

>[Terry Dobson - "Aikido in Everyday Life"](http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/1556431511?ie=UTF8&camp=3194&creative=21330&creativeASIN=1556431511&linkCode=shr&tag=theginmum-21&qid=1402165762&sr=8-1&keywords=Terry+Dobson)

>[George J Thompson - "Verbal Judo"](http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/0062107704?ie=UTF8&camp=3194&creative=21330&creativeASIN=0062107704&linkCode=shr&tag=theginmum-21&qid=1402165864&sr=8-2&keywords=George+J+Thompson)

>[Luke A Archer - "Verbal Aikido."](http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/1478198079?ie=UTF8&camp=3194&creative=21330&creativeASIN=1478198079&linkCode=shr&tag=theginmum-21&qid=1402165612&sr=8-1&keywords=Luke+archer)



Actually five - because Keith Johnstone has something interesting to say
about everything



>[Keith Johnstone - "Improv for Storytellers"](http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/0571190995?ie=UTF8&camp=3194&creative=21330&creativeASIN=0571190995&linkCode=shr&tag=theginmum-21&qid=1402165571&sr=8-2&keywords=keith+johnstone)



They are all interesting (and frustrating) in their own ways.



**Suzette Elgin Haden** distinguishes different modes of speech:



Blamer - "You are an idiot".

Computer - "There seems to be a problem here."

Leveller - "Look, we're never going to get anywhere if we carry on like
this."

One crucial point that she makes (that's actually reflected in the three
other books to some degree) is that the worst thing that you can do is to
respond to any attacks (and attacks can come in any of these three modes)
in blamer mode.  This is what Archer would call "responding to an attack
with an equal amount of energy and in a directly opposing direction."[2]



The other crucial point that she makes is that it's very important to
notice *when* you're being attacked and part of that is to understand that
attacks can come in "Computer" mode and in "Leveller Mode" as well as in
blamer mode.



**Terry Dobson's** book is annoyingly provisional, but he does say some very
clear things about the danger of attacking - and uses diagrams.  The big
weakness with his book (and it's actually a weakness with all of them) is
that the dialogue isn't real and therefore sounds *terrible*.



These are two quotes from "Aikido in Everyday Life" that I think are
interesting.



>Most attackers are spoiling for a fight. They are overextended, and they
need the victim to fight back to preserve their tenuous balance.

[which is why pushing back in the exact opposite direction that you're
being attacked is such a mistake - it keeps the fight stable.]



>Even as we write, we're conscious of the fact that Fighting Back is one of
the most counterproductive responses in most conflict situations. Certainly
it is the least wisely and most widely used tactic in the whole lexicon of
conflict.



The other thing that Dobson makes really clear is that whatever the
situation is, you are better served by understanding that you have choices.



* You can block

* You CAN run away!

* You can deceive

* You can blend (this is the Aikido response, which is pretty opaque in
Dobson's book, but is made clearer in Luke A Archer's book).



**George Thompson** There are two things (I think that I got from the George Thompson book) One
is something that I need to look at more closely, is a way of diffusing
situations by using elliptical and idiomatic phrases e.g. "'s alright",
"notta problem".  The other is something that he calls the "Five step hard
style".  I list it here with an example focused on getting some explicit
requirements from a customer (sound familiar to anyone?)



1)  **Ask** - "Can I have this information?"

2)  **Set Context** - "I need this information so that we can get on with
this project."

3)  **Present Options** - "If we get this information, we can carry on with
this project, if we don't get this information we'll either have to work on
a specific assumption that we make ourselves, or stop the project."

4)  **Confirm** - "Is there anything at all I can do that will allow/make
you to give me this information?"

5)  **Act** - OK, in the absence of this information, we're going to

* a) stop the project

* b) make this explicit assumption



**Luke A Archer's** book is, like the others, frustratingly brief. But
again, it has some really interesting ideas in it.



One idea is sparring! Get some people together and let them have verbal
fights. Let them have "lots of goes" as Keith Johnstone might say.  This is
a really good idea, but it's also intriguing how dangerous it might be.
Imagine if someone in a sparring contest calls someone a fat bastard - and
they are actually fat? Something like this happened recently to me when I
was doing some improve.  And it really fucking hurt.  Actually somebody
took the piss out of my hair recently when I was doing improv and I wasn't
too happy about that either.



One interesting thing about this is that if you could get people sparring
(safely), then you could also actually record and transcribe the sparring
and maybe you could put it in a book (one weakness with all of these books
is that they don't have any "real" or even "realistic" dialogue - of course
even sparring wouldn't be real - conversations in them.)

The other interesting idea in Archer's book is the idea of creating
imbalance and then guiding your opponent to balance. The idea of getting
"side by side" with your opponent - where it is much harder for them to
attack you. Archer makes the point that if you can unbalance your opponent
and then guide them back to balance three times, then they become reluctant
to attack you.  As with Dobson's books, I'm less than convinced that all
the kinks of how Aikido works in a verbal setting rather than a non-verbal
setting have been worked out.  It's disappointing as well, that this claims
to be the first of three books, but the other two books don't appear to be
forthcoming.



**Keith Johnstone** I'm including Keith because of his discussion of "The
Hat Game." I was going to do the hat game at my verbal self-defence seminar
- I even bought big, floppy hats, especially for the occasion.  The idea of
the hat game is that two people play an improv scene.  They are both
wearing floppy hats.  The object of the game is to grab your opponents hat.
If you try to grab and fail, you lose.  You can't "hold onto your hat." You
can't talk about the hats.  What makes this interesting is Johnstone's
observations.  For example that people who are good at the hat game stay
present all the way through, but manage to make their opponents "go inside
themselves." And have to think.



OK, that's enough writing for today.  Hopefully I'll manage to write a post
tomorrow about meditation and all of the interesting stuff that's come out
of reading "Thoughts without a Thinker".  I want that post to be entitled
"It's not you, it's not me."
